[docs] - Add Automation concept page (#DEV-80) (#19266)
dagster-io/dagster: docs/content/concepts/automation.mdx

      <th
        style={{
          width: "15%",
        }}
      >
        Works with
      </th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr>
      <td>
        <a href="/concepts/partitions-schedules-sensors/schedules">Schedules</a>
      </td>
      <td>Starts a job at a specified time</td>
      <td>
        <ul
          style={{
            marginTop: "0px",
          }}
        >
          <li
            style={{
              marginTop: "0px",
            }}
          >
            You're using jobs, and
          </li>
          <li>You want to run the job at a specific time</li>
        </ul>
      </td>
      <td>
        <ul
          style={{
            marginTop: "0px",
          }}
        >
          <li
            style={{
              marginTop: "0px",
            }}
          >
            Assets
          </li>
          <li>Ops</li>
          <li>Graphs</li>
        </ul>
      </td>
      <td></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>
        <a href="/concepts/partitions-schedules-sensors/sensors">Sensors</a>
      </td>
      <td>
        Starts a job or materializes a selection of assets when a specific event
        occurs
      </td>

>       <td>You want to trigger runs based off an event</td>

Reviewer: Should this be an <li> too?

---
title: "Automation | Dagster Docs"
description: "Learn to automatically run your Dagster pipelines."
---

# Automation

Dagster offers several ways to run data pipelines without manual intervation, including traditional scheduling and event-based triggers. Automating your Dagster pipelines can boost efficiency and ensure that data is produced consistently and reliably.

When one of Dagster's automation methods is triggered, a **tick** is created, which indicates that a **run** should occur. The tick will kick off a run, which is a single instance of a pipeline being executed.

In this guide, we'll cover the available automation methods Dagser provides and when to use each one.

---

## Prerequisites

Before continuing, you should be familiar with:

- [Software-defined Assets][assets]
- [Jobs][jobs] (_optional_)
- [Ops][ops] (_optional; advanced_)

---

> ## Available methods

Reviewer: I think it might help to talk a little about declarative vs imperative approaches to scheduling. Something like:

"Dagster offers several ways to automate your data pipelines. 

Schedules is our imperative approach, which allows you specify exactly when you would like a particular set of assets defined by a job to run. 

Sensors is an event-based approach that is well-suited to changes to an outside environment ....

AMP is our declarative system, where you assign policies to assets and allow Dagster to determine the best approach to keeping your assets up-to-date to adhere to those policies. You can apply both time-based policies, as well as more complex policies that .... etc
"

In this section, we'll touch on each of the automation methods currently supported by Dagster. After that we'll discuss what to think about when [selecting a method](#selecting-a-method). 

### Schedules

Schedules kick off [jobs][jobs] at fixed time intervals. Using schedules, you can start jobs at specific times, such as Mondays at 9:00 AM. Jobs triggered by schedules can contain a subset of [assets][assets] or [ops][ops]. Refer to the [Schedules documentation][schedules] to learn more.

### Sensors

> To run a job or materialize an asset in response to specific events, you can use sensors. Sensors continuously check and execute logic to know whether to kick off a run. They are commonly used for situations where you want to materialize an asset after something else happens, such as:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can use sensors to run a job or materialize an asset in response to specific events. Sensors periodically check and execute logic to know whether to kick off a run. They are commonly used for situations where you want to materialize an asset after some externally observable event happens, such as:
```

- A new file arrives in a specific location, such as Amazon S3

> - Another asset elsewhere has materialized

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- An asset not materialized within Dagster has changed
```

Reviewer: Or was this specifically about observing Dagster assets?

- An external system frees up a worker slot

You can also use sensors to act on the status of a job run. Refer to the [Sensors documentation][sensors] to learn more.

### Auto-materialize policies <Experimental />

> Unlike schedules, Auto-materialize Policies (AMP) don't run at a specific time. Instead, an AMP allows you to describe the conditions under which assets should be materialized or skipped. An AMP, for example, could kick off a run for a downstream asset immediately after upstream changes occur.

Reviewer: Technically, there are AMP that have cron-schedules. Not sure if that's a necessary point here though

- A new file arrives in a specific location, such as Amazon S3
- Another asset elsewhere has materialized
- An external system frees up a worker slot

You can also use sensors to act on the status of a job run. Refer to the [Sensors documentation][sensors] to learn more.

### Auto-materialize policies <Experimental />

Unlike schedules, Auto-materialize Policies (AMP) don't run at a specific time. Instead, an AMP allows you to describe the conditions under which assets should be materialized or skipped. An AMP, for example, could kick off a run for a downstream asset immediately after upstream changes occur.

AMPs are declared on an asset-by-asset basis, but can be applied to multiple assets at once. Refer to the [Auto-materializing Assets documentation][auto-materialize-policies] to learn more.

### Asset Sensors <Experimental />

Asset sensors trigger jobs when a specified asset is materialized. Using asset sensors, you can instigate runs across jobs and code locations and keep downstream assets up-to-date with ease.

> Refer to the [Asset Sensor documentation][asset-sensors] to learn more.

Reviewer: I think this is fine to keep for now

AMPs are declared on an asset-by-asset basis, but can be applied to multiple assets at once. Refer to the [Auto-materializing Assets documentation][auto-materialize-policies] to learn more.

### Asset Sensors <Experimental />

Asset sensors trigger jobs when a specified asset is materialized. Using asset sensors, you can instigate runs across jobs and code locations and keep downstream assets up-to-date with ease.

Refer to the [Asset Sensor documentation][asset-sensors] to learn more.

---

## Selecting a method

Before you dive into automating your pipelines, you should think about:

- Is my pipeline made up of assets, ops, graphs, or some of everything?
- How often does the data need to be refreshed?
- Is the data partitioned, and do old records require updates?
- Should updates occur in batches? Or should updates start when specific events occur?

The following cheatsheet contains high-level details about each of the automation methods we covered, along with an example of when each one would be used.

> | Name                                                                  | How it works                                                                                                      | Works with          | Example                                                              |

Author: How can we work partitions into this? Should we?

Reviewer: I don't know if partitions fits here, I think the primary rubric is whether or not you are working from jobs or not.
I wonder if maybe we can be a little more prescriptive here?

If you are triggering based off an event: use sensors
If you are using jobs: use schedules
If you are not using jobs and are comfortable with experimental APIs, and want a declarative approach: use AMP
